+++
author = "Someone"
title = "scarcity"
date = "2025-12-10"
description = "review"
math = true
+++

A review of the book by Mullainathan and Shafir titled ["Scarcity"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scarcity:_Why_Having_Too_Little_Means_So_Much). 
<!--more-->

## general

I think the biggest takeaway from the book is that I need to artificially induce scarcity into my life so as to get more things done but simultaneously drop things quickly like garbage collection as asynchronous threads burn up my battery life (unfinished work, empty promises, etc.). Successful people do in fact tend to be a bit paranoid and give everything deadlines but this comes at a cost of your own health so it's just a trivial recommendation all should follow. In moderation, I think it's nice to create contests, competitive environments, and tight deadlines to push through things that are uninteresting to you. This book also touches on something I've experienced as well - full-time hobbies eventually become jobs and share the same ebbs and flows of your vanilla job as a trader, doctor, engineer, etc. as it occupies a larger chunk of your attention making the activity less scarce. This also illustrates why some lunatics like Musk have difficulty stepping down and sunsetting w/ all their accrued wealth. I could not resonate w/ the book's discussion of poverty, but I do agree like w/ Maslow's hierarchy of needs that we should establish some basic universal income for housing and food. There really is no IQ or special thing distinguishing one human being from another yet we force severals to have their whole existence focused on basic needs (big mortgages, bills, healthcare, etc.) while others get to live freely w/o ever thinking about these things? Borrowing from the Supernormal Stimuli book, I think it'd be nice to genetically enforce we get human beings w/ less of an impulse to collect and consume everything - we're living in the golden age of consumerism and it's pitting one against the other. Yet as I say this, UBI is not enough to solve the problem. When the population grows and resources remain constant, the next generation is left with a lower standard of living but higher GDP - yes to the Pareto distribution and inequality! But seriously, it's not trivial and population dynamics make this probably not worth pursuing and the only adage we ought to reinforce is to be kind to one another (I know it's Christian, but still...). Another thought crossed my mind regarding the bandwidth tax - as corporations push us to work more and we adapt this crabs in the bucket mentality towards GDP and productivity and innovation, our time will be eaten up by work and we will make more impulsive decisions - adopting bad habits w/ food, drugs, exercise, etc. The point is that if you think work life balance will improve as a collective whole in the US, then you are shorting the US healthcare system, but if you think that it will decrease (as I do due to increasing globalization pressures from neighboring developing countries), then you are long the US healthcare system as people will increasingly need to splurge on healthcare issues from sitting too much or eating junk. I wish I had a European passport as those guys seem to have figured this out and are willing to fight for the luxury of their time at the expense of a more moderate consumption of goods and services and a declining GDP (rip France & GB).

**Pros**: Like most of these sciency bubblegum reads, arguments were not rigorously made nor studies effectively covered; however, I did think their thought experiments and metaphors carried enough candor to make me convinced that thinking about scarcity and its role on us is an important frame of reference. The bandwidth tax was especially interesting as I have observed this - my really rich friends have the luxury of time and the ability to choose topics like math or philosophy or investments to ponder and study while poor folk have more trivial tasks piled up in the queue that tax their bandwidth and prevent them from doubling their investments and also make bad decisions like drugs, consuming unhealthy foods, and being irritable towards coworkers (preventing promotions). The point is it spirals out of control and I thought this was a really succinct way to capture what I intuitively gathered.

**Cons**: Again, it would be nice to explain the rigor of their studies - behavioral economics is a hogwash of black magic and irreproducible experiements plagued by confirmation bias. One other thing common in these books - just f$$&*%$#@ing get to the point and stop beating around the bush with fluff for 250 pages. This could literally be an email or 5 page essay - if you want others to read, make it worth reading by making every word, punctuation, and sentence count. 

## quotes

> Scarcity brings about behaviors that make us shortsighted. We ignore the (future) health cost of eating out when we are busy. We do not think about the implications of paying back payday loans (in the future) when we are tight on cash. We do not consider the (future) benefits of keeping our offices clean when working on a deadline.

> Poverty *itself* taxes the mind. Even without an experimenter around to remind us of scarcity, poverty reduces fluid intelligence and executive control... This is not because [the poor] are less capable, but rather because part of their mind is captured by scarcity [of money].

> Scarcity doesn't just lead us to overborrow or to fail to invest. It leaves us handicapped in other aspects of our lives. It makes us dumber. It makes us more impulsive. We must get by with less mind available, with less fluid intelligence and with diminished executive control-making life that much harder.